@node Objects In Memory
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Objects In Memory

@menu
* Type tags::
* Heap Object Layout::
@end menu

@node Type tags
@section Type tags

The in-memory representation of Lisp data includes type information
about each object.  This type information takes the form of a lowtag
in the low bits of each pointer to heap space, a widetag for each
boxed immediate value and a header (also with a widetag) at the start
of the allocated space for each object.  These tags are used to inform
both the GC and Lisp code about the type and allocated size of Lisp
objects.

@c FIXME: Add diagrams showing tag allocation to next two sections.

@subsection Lowtags

Objects allocated on the Lisp heap are aligned to a double-word
boundary, leaving the low-order bits (which would normally identify a
particular octet within the first two words) available for use to hold
type information.  This turns out to be three bits on 32-bit systems
and four bits on 64-bit systems.

Of these 8 or 16 tags, we have some constraints for allocation:

@itemize
@item
We need 6 of the low 8 bits of the word for widetags, meaning that one
out of every four lowtags must be an @code{other-immediate} lowtag.
@item
We have four pointer types.  Instance (struct and CLOS) pointers,
function pointers, list pointers, and other pointers.
@item
@code{fixnum}s are required to have their lowtags be comprised
entirely of zeros.
@item
There are additional constraints around the ordering of the pointer
types, particularly with respect to list pointers (the NIL-cons hack).
@end itemize

Complicating this issue is that while the lowtag @emph{space} is three
or four bits wide, some of the lowtags are effectively narrower.  The
@code{other-immediate} tags effectively have a two-bit lowtag, and
@code{fixnum}s have historically been one bit narrower than the other
lowtags (thus @code{even-fixnum-lowtag} and @code{odd-fixnum-lowtag})
though with the recent work on wider fixnums on 64-bit systems this is
no longer necessarily so.

The lowtags are specified in
@file{src/compiler/generic/early-objdef.lisp}.

@c 32-bit lowtag assignment
@c x00 -- Fixnum
@c x10 -- Other-immediate
@c xx1 -- Pointer
@c 001 --   Instance-pointer
@c 011 --   List-pointer
@c 101 --   Function-pointer
@c 111 --   Other-pointer

@c 32-bit lowtag assignment (proposed wider-fixnum branch)
@c xxx0 -- Fixnum
@c xx01 -- Other-immediate
@c xx11 -- Pointer
@c x011 --   List-pointer
@c 0111 --   (Either instance or function pointer)
@c 1111 --   Other-pointer

@c 64-bit lowtag assignment (pre-wider-fixnums)
@c x000 -- Fixnum
@c xx10 -- Other-immediate
@c xyyy -- Unused (where 011 <= yyy <= 110)
@c xyy1 -- Pointer (where yy is either 00 or 11)
@c 0001 --   Instance-pointer
@c 0111 --   List-pointer
@c 1001 --   Function-pointer
@c 1111 --   Other-pointer

@c 64-bit lowtag assignment (wider-fixnums)
@c xyz0 -- Fixnum (where z or yz may also be 0 depending on n-fixnum-tag-bits)
@c xx01 -- Other-immediate
@c xx11 -- Pointer
@c 0011 --   Instance-pointer
@c 0111 --   List-pointer
@c 1011 --   Function-pointer
@c 1111 --   Other-pointer

@subsubsection Fixnums

@code{Fixnum}s are signed integers represented as immediate values.
In SBCL, these integers are @code{(- n-word-bits n-fixnum-tag-bits)}
bits wide, stored in the most-significant section of a machine word.

The reason that @code{fixnum} tags are required to have the low
@code{n-fixnum-tag-bits} as zeros is that it allows for addition and
subtraction to be performed using native machine instructions
directly, and multiplication and division can be performed likewise
using a simple shift instruction to compensate for the effect of the
tag.

@subsubsection Other-immediates

@code{Other-immediate}s are the lowtag part of widetag values.  Due to
the constraints of widetag allocation, one out of every four lowtags
must be a widetag (alternately, the width of the
@code{other-immediate} lowtag is two bits).

@subsubsection Pointers

There are four different pointer lowtags, largely for optimization
purposes.

@itemize
@item
We have a distinct list pointer tag so that we can do a listp test by
simply checking the pointer tag instead of needing to retrieve a
header word for each @code{cons} cell.  This effectively halves the
memory cost of @code{cons} cells.
@item
We have a distinct instance pointer tag so that we do not need to
check a header word for each instance when doing a type check.  This
saves a memory access for retrieving the class of an instance.
@item
We have a distinct function pointer tag so that we do not need to
check a header word to determine if a given pointer is directly
funcallable (that is, if the pointer is to a closure, a simple-fun, or
a funcallable-instance).  This saves a memory access in the type test
prior to @code{funcall} or @code{apply} of a function object.
@item
We have one last pointer tag for everything else.  Obtaining further
type information from these pointers requires fetching the header word
and dispatching on the widetag.
@end itemize

@subsection Widetags

Widetags are used for three purposes.  First, to provide type
information for immediate (non-pointer) data such as characters.
Second, to provide ``marker'' values for things such as unbound slots.
Third, to provide type information for objects stored on the heap.

Because widetags are used for immediate data they must have a lowtag
component.  This ends up being the @code{other-immediate} lowtags.
For various reasons it was deemed convenient for widetags to be no
more than eight bits wide, and with 27 or more distinct array types
(depending on build-time configuration), seven numeric types, markers,
and non-numeric heap object headers there ends up being more than 32
widetags required (though less than 64).  This combination of factors
leads to the requirement that one out of every four lowtags be an
@code{other-immediate} lowtag.

As widetags are involved in type tests for non-CLOS objects, their
allocation is carefully arranged to allow for certain type tests to be
cheaper than they might otherwise be.

@itemize
@item
The numeric types are arranged to make @code{rational}, @code{float},
@code{real}, @code{complex} and @code{number} type tests become range
tests on the widetag.
@item
The array types are arranged to make various type tests become range
tests on the widetag.
@item
The string types have disjoint ranges, but have been arranged so that
their ranges differ only by one bit, allowing the @code{stringp} type
test to become a masking operation followed by a range test or a
masking operation followed by a simple comparison.
@item
There may be other clevernesses, these are just what can be found
through reading the comments above the widetag definition.
@end itemize

The widetags are specified in
@file{src/compiler/generic/early-objdef.lisp}.

@node Heap Object Layout
@section Heap Object Layout

Objects stored in the heap are of two kinds: those with headers, and
cons cells.  If the first word of an object has a header widetag then
the object has the type and layout associated with that widetag.
Otherwise, the object is assumed to be a @code{cons} cell.

Some objects have ``unboxed'' words without any associated type
information as well as the more usual ``boxed'' words with lowtags.
Obvious cases include the specialized array types, some of the numeric
types, @code{system-area-pointer}s, and so on.

The primitive object layouts are specified in
@file{src/compiler/generic/objdef.lisp}.

@subsection Header Values

As a widetag is only eight bits wide but a heap object header takes a
full machine word, there is an extra 24 or 56 bits of space available
for unboxed data storage in each heap object.  This space is called
the ``header value'', and is used for various purposes depending on
the type of heap object in question.

@subsection Symbols

In contrast to the simple model of symbols provided in the Common Lisp
standard, symbol objects in SBCL do not have a function cell.
Instead, the mapping from symbols to functions is done via the
compiler globaldb.

There are two additional slots associated with symbols.  One is a hash
value for the symbol (based on the symbol name), which avoids having
to recompute the hash from the name every time it is required.

The other additional slot, on threaded systems only, is the TLS index,
which is either @code{no-tls-value-marker-widetag} or an unboxed byte
offset within the TLS area to the TLS slot associated with the symbol.
Because the unboxed offset is aligned to a word boundary it appears as
a @code{fixnum} when viewed as boxed data.  It is not, in general,
safe to increment this value as a @code{fixnum}, however, in case
@code{n-fixnum-tag-bits} changes@footnote{This is not as unlikely as
it might seem at first; while historically @code{n-fixnum-tag-bits}
has always been the same as @code{word-shift} there is a branch where
it is permitted to vary at build time from @code{word-shift} to as low
as 1 on 64-bit ports, and a proposed scheme to allow the same on
32-bit ports}.

@subsection The NIL-cons Hack

As an ``optimization'', the symbol @code{nil} has
@code{list-pointer-lowtag} rather than @code{other-pointer-lowtag},
and is aligned in memory so that the value and hash slots are the
@code{car} and @code{cdr} of the @code{cons}, with both slots
containing @code{nil}.  This allows for @code{car} and @code{cdr} to
simply do a lowtag test and slot access instead of having to
explicitly test for @code{nil}, at the cost of requiring all symbol
type tests and slot accesses to test for @code{nil}.

@subsection Functions and Code Components

@c This could do with a diagram showing a code-component with a couple
@c of simple-fun entry points.

All compiled code resides in @code{code-component} objects.  These
objects consist of a header, some number of boxed literal values, a
``data block'' containing machine code and @code{simple-fun} headers,
and a ``trace table'' which is currently unused@footnote{Trace tables
were originally used to support garbage collection using gengc in
CMUCL.  As there is still vestigial support for carrying them around
at the end of @code{code-component}s, they may end up being used for
something else in the future.}.

The @code{simple-fun} headers represent simple function objects (not
@code{funcallable-instance}s or closures), and each
@code{code-component} will typically have one for the main entry point
and one per closure entry point (as the function underlying the
closure, not the closure object proper).  In a compiler trace-file,
the @code{simple-fun} headers are all listed as entries in the IR2
component.

The @code{simple-fun} headers are held in a linked list per
@code{code-component} in order to allow the garbage collector to find
them during relocation.  In order to be able to find the start of a
@code{code-component} from a @code{simple-fun}, the header value is
the offset in words from the start of the @code{code-component} to the
start of the @code{simple-fun}.
