@node Threads
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Threads

@menu
* Implementation (Linux x86)::
@end menu

@node Implementation (Linux x86)
@section Implementation (Linux x86/x86-64)

Threading is implemented using pthreads and some Linux specific bits
like futexes.

On x86 the per-thread local bindings for special variables is achieved
using the %fs segment register to point to a per-thread storage area.
This may cause interesting results if you link to foreign code that
expects threading or creates new threads, and the thread library in
question uses %fs in an incompatible way. On x86-64 the r12 register
has a similar role.

Queues require the @code{sys_futex} system call to be available: this
is the reason for the NPTL requirement.  We test at runtime that this
system call exists.

Garbage collection is done with the existing Conservative Generational
GC.  Allocation is done in small (typically 8k) regions: each thread
has its own region so this involves no stopping. However, when a
region fills, a lock must be obtained while another is allocated, and
when a collection is required, all processes are stopped.  This is
achieved by sending them signals, which may make for interesting
behaviour if they are interrupted in system calls.  The streams
interface is believed to handle the required system call restarting
correctly, but this may be a consideration when making other blocking
calls e.g. from foreign library code.

Large amounts of the SBCL library have not been inspected for
thread-safety.  Some of the obviously unsafe areas have large locks
around them, so compilation and fasl loading, for example, cannot be
parallelized.  Work is ongoing in this area.
